Ontology
========

In the 1999 movie *The Matrix*, Keanu Reeves' character is having a rough day. He needs to master every martial art in just a few hours. But he's in luck. In the future, humans can download knowledge from computers directly into their brains. After a few swift clicks, Keanu turns towards the camera and dramatically says, `"I know Kung Fu!" <https://youtu.be/OrzgxUhnYjY?si=lpgV8uk4jBrx1lFD&t=70>`__.

He was saved because someone had encoded all the world's **knowledge** about Kung Fu into a **meaningful language** that machines and humans can understand. *That's an ontology*. Put another way, an ontology is a formal representation of knowledge, expressed as a conceptual network that conveys meaning in a way that both humans and machines can process.

Far from being a far-out science fiction concept, ontologies form the backbone of many tools we use every day. They are foundational to the modern World Wide Web, social media networks, and media streaming platforms. Ontologies are immensely powerful tools for sharing knowledge, linking resources, and assigning meaning to data.

Background
----------

The roots of modern ontologies trace back to ancient Greece. Ontology, as a branch of metaphysics, deals with the nature of being. These philosophical origins are still evident in the way we conceptualize and structure knowledge in modern ontologies. You can explore more about the philosophical aspects of ontology here. 

In information science, ontologies were reinvented in the mid-20th century to bridge the gap between how humans and computers process information. For humans, information is understood as a set of concepts with meaningful, logically consistent relationships. For computers, however, information is represented as binary code: a sequence of ones and zeros.

.. admonition:: The Salad Bar Thought Experiment

   Imagine you have built a robot to do your bidding. You ask it to go to a restaurant, make a salad at the salad bar, and bring it back to you. What information does the robot need to know to accomplish that task?

   - It needs to know where the restaurant is and how to get there
   - It needs to know the recipe for a salad and how to select the ingredients from the salad bar
   - It needs to know that a salad comes in a bowl and is proportioned as a meal for one or more people
   - etc.

   Even this seemingly simple task requires a vast amount of information across multiple domains. However, the challenge isn’t just the volume of information—it’s also the need for this information to be linked together in a logically consistent way. This linkage allows the robot to reason about aspects of the task that are not explicitly stated.

To get over this barrier, researchers developed ontologies in the form of network graphs. These graphs link concepts using relationships in node-edge-node statements called *triples*. The concepts within the graph can then be mapped to computer datasets, effectively assigning meaning to the data and enabling machines to process and reason about it.

The next major step came in 1989 from a quiet corner of Switzerland. A 34-year-old researcher at CERN named Tim Berners-Lee was trying to develop a way to manage the vast amount of data generated by the nuclear research facility. He proposed a knowledge management system using hypertext to link documents and datasets. He called this system *The Mesh*, but within a few short years, it would be known by another name: *The World Wide Web*.

After the invention of the World Wide Web, the volume of information available to humans and computers grew exponentially. It quickly became evident that merely linking resources with hypertext was not sufficient to navigate the wilderness of data. The answer was *The Semantic Web*, an extension of the World Wide Web that uses ontologies and other semantic tools to describe the meaning of data and the nature of its connections. 

To build the Semantic Web, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) created a core technology stack expressed as a system of standards, including the Resource Description Framework (RDF) and the Web Ontology Language (OWL). RDF provides a basic model for representing data as triples (subject-predicate-object) in a graph structure. OWL extends RDF and is designed to represent rich and complex knowledge about things, groups of things, and relationships between them. These Semantic Web standards - among others - are the foundation of much of today’s ontology development.

Semantic Reasoning
------------------

One of the most powerful features of ontologies is their ability to enable reasoning. Reasoning allows machines to infer new knowledge from existing data. For example, if an ontology defines that all salads are food and Caesar salads are a type of salad, a reasoning system can conclude that Caesar salad is food—even if this specific relationship is not explicitly stated in the data.

This inferencing capability is crucial for solving complex problems and answering questions that go beyond surface-level information. Reasoning in ontologies is supported by formal logic and rules embedded within frameworks like OWL. These rules allow machines to:

- **Classify Data:** Automatically categorize new items based on their properties and relationships.

- **Check Consistency:** Ensure that data does not contain logical contradictions (e.g., an object cannot simultaneously be defined as "hot" and "cold").

- **Discover Relationships:** Identify hidden connections between concepts, enhancing data integration and discovery.

For instance, reasoning systems are used in healthcare to determine potential drug interactions based on patient data and medical ontologies. Similarly, in battery science, reasoning can help identify optimal materials by linking experimental results with material properties and performance metrics.

.. admonition:: *The One-Armed Person Thought Experiment*

   Imagine we want to describe humans in an ontology. We might include some relationships like:

   - A human is a mammal
   - A human has one brain
   - A human has two arms
   - A man is a human
   - A woman is human
   - etc. 

   We might then create an individual called *Sykes* and make the statement that 'Sykes is a man'. Reasoning according to the knowledge in the ontology will return that because 'Sykes is a man' and 'a man is a human', then it follows that 'Sykes is a human'.

   But then Sykes loses an arm in some terrible accident. We append the statement 'Sykes has one arm'. Reasoning again will create a logical inconsistency because if 'Sykes has one arm' and 'a human as two arms', then it follows that Sykes cannot be a human. 

   This demonstrates how tricky it can be to maintain internal logical consistency, especially for complex ontologies, and how important it is to support correct reasoning and inferrence. 

By enabling machines to "think" beyond the explicit data provided, reasoning transforms ontologies into dynamic tools for problem-solving and decision-making.

Semantic Querying
-----------------

One of the most transformative applications of ontologies is their support for semantic querying. Unlike traditional keyword-based searches, semantic queries leverage the structured knowledge within ontologies to deliver precise and meaningful results. By understanding the relationships between concepts, machines can interpret queries in a way that mimics human reasoning. For instance, if an ontology knows that "Golden Retriever" is a type of "dog," a query for "animal" can return results that include Golden Retrievers, even if they were not explicitly mentioned.

Semantic querying is powered by languages such as SPARQL, a query language designed for RDF-based data. SPARQL allows users to retrieve and manipulate structured data by specifying patterns to match within the ontology’s graph. For example, a SPARQL allows users to transform natural human queries like, "Which restaurants serve vegetarian salads?" or "What materials are compatible with a specific battery type?" into a graph pattern to retrieve compatible answers. The ontology’s structure enables the system to traverse relationships and return accurate answers based on the data.

This capability is invaluable in fields like healthcare, where semantic queries can identify drug interactions or link patient symptoms to potential diagnoses. Similarly, in environmental research, semantic querying can connect datasets on climate patterns, biodiversity, and conservation efforts. By enabling machines to "understand" data, ontologies transform how we access and utilize information, making semantic querying a cornerstone of modern knowledge systems.

Modularity in Ontologies
------------------------

Ontologies are not monolithic structures; instead, they are often modular and designed to be extended. This modularity ensures flexibility, scalability, and reusability, allowing ontologies to be tailored for specific domains and applications while remaining consistent with broader frameworks.

.. admonition:: **The Benefits of Modularity**

    **Scalability:** Modular ontologies can grow incrementally by adding new modules without overhauling the entire system.

    **Reusability:** Common frameworks and domain ontologies can be reused across multiple applications, reducing duplication of effort.

    **Interoperability:** Modular design ensures compatibility between different ontologies, enabling seamless data integration and exchange.

The modular nature of ontologies reflects their purpose: to provide a structured yet flexible way to represent and share knowledge, making them indispensable tools for modern information systems.

Top-Level Ontologies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the source of many ontologies are top-level frameworks, often called upper ontologies. These define the most general concepts and relationships that apply across multiple domains. Top-level ontology frameworks establish the rules and shared vocabulary for creating domain-specific ontologies. They provide the "grammar" for more specialized knowledge representations and promote the re-use of existing concepts within their internal systems. Some notable exmaples of top-level ontologies include Basic Formal Ontology (BFO), Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering (DOLCE), and the Elementary Multiperspective Materials Ontology (EMMO). 

.. admonition:: *Some Common Top-Level Ontologies*

    BFO is a widely used top-level ontology in science and healthcare. It provides a framework for domain-specific extensions by focusing on general concepts such as objects, processes, and their interrelations. It emphasizes simplicity and consistency, making it a reliable backbone for more specialized ontologies.

    DOLCE is designed to represent common human experiences and conceptualizations. It captures everyday knowledge and cognitive structures. Its focus on common sense reasoning makes it particularly valuable for applications in linguistics, cognitive science, and AI.

    EMMO is specialized ontology developed for materials science and engineering. It integrates perspectives from physics, chemistry, and engineering to create a cohesive framework for modeling materials and their properties. It supports data interoperability and advanced simulations across disciplines.

Domain Ontologies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Domain ontologies take the foundational concepts provided by top-level frameworks and expand them to cover knowledge specific to particular fields. For instance, the Gene Ontology (GO) delves into the intricacies of biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions, offering a structured way to describe the complexity of life at a molecular level. Similarly, the Battery Ontology focuses on standardizing the representation of materials, components, and processes involved in battery research. By building on the shared principles of top-level ontologies, domain ontologies create a consistent and interoperable framework, enabling seamless integration of data across diverse fields.

Application Ontologies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Application ontologies extend general and domain-specific knowledge to address specialized needs. For example, a healthcare ontology might focus on patient management by detailing intake processes, diagnostic tools, and treatment plans, tailoring it to hospital operations. Similarly, an agricultural ontology could describe crop cycles, soil management, and pest control practices to meet farming requirements. These extensions achieve a balance between addressing unique needs and staying compatible with broader frameworks.

Knowledge Graphs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Knowledge graphs are a practical implementation of ontologies that represent specific instances of data as a dynamic network of interconnected entities and relationships. While ontologies focus on defining general concepts and their relationships, knowledge graphs concentrate on specific instances or individuals, connecting them to form a rich and navigable web of knowledge.

Powered by ontologies, knowledge graphs enhance integration, discovery, and reasoning across specific data instances. They are widely used in search engines (e.g., Google Knowledge Graph), recommendation systems, and intelligent assistants, providing context-aware results that mimic human-like understanding of data.